Using agents to write code has never
been easier. And in the past few weeks,
I've had several conversations with
company leaders, developers, and other
people using agents to write code,
talking about automation that you can
achieve with agents in your codebase. So
today I kind of want to walk through my
personal ladder of the six levels that I
have when I think about agentic
engineering and where I think most
people are at, how you can get between
levels, as well as show actual examples
in the code of what each level looks
like. So let's dig into it. So at the
very bottom of the ladder here, we have
level one, which is interactive. And
this is where every developer starts
when they get into using LLM to write
their code for them. This is default
cloud code for example configuration or
it could be pi or open code whatever you
use and this is no configuration no
skills nothing custom at all and you're
babysitting every step of the agent
diving into the code here for level one
let's assume that I'm working in a
project here that I've already had a ton
of work done on maybe I've
[clears throat] written this whole
project by hand and I'm just installing
claude for the first time so I'll remove
all of the claude related
setup files here. If we open up the
context window here in cloud code, we
can see that this is there's one little
memory file here, but it's just 300
tokens, so I'm going to keep it for
right now. But other than that, this is
cloud running completely default with no
guidance of how to use this project.
What level one looks like here is say
I'm very familiar with this codebase. I
know that I want let's say add a new
type to this snapshot row. I can just
ask claude add a new agent type to and
I'll just copy the path of this file and
I'll send it off with this task. It's a
very manual process. It's asking me a
good question here. What do we want this
to look like? But you can imagine here
if I wanted to get development done, I
have to sit in this single cloud code
instance, sit in this agent window and
have a conversation about what I'm
looking for, explain to it, okay, if we
change this type, this other file is
going to break. So we have to make sure
that the other file gets updated as
well. It's a very manual hands-on
process. So let's see how we can move a
bit further up the stack here. Next up
we have level two which is expertise
adding configuration and persistent
memory between sessions to your agents.
What this looks like is a very basic
claw.md setup or agents.md setup. You
have custom commands and prompts. You
want to make sure that your agents are
getting persistent context and memory
when they begin work on your project so
that they're not going into every task
blind. So I built a tool called Mulch.
And tools like Mulch, they allow your
agents to persist learnings across
sessions. So an agent runs into a
problem and it can store that so that
the next agent knows that problem and
how to avoid it. This means your agent
isn't guessing anymore, but you as a
developer are still in the loop for all
of that. Let's take a look at what level
two looks like in the code. So I can run
claude again. And now if I run the
context window, we can see it has access
to the cloud. MD file now. And if I go
into cloud.md for my project in
specific, we can see this is a very
detailed file. It's quite large. And
essentially what it shows the agent is
how to use a tool like mulch. I added a
bit to the initial prompt here that just
says run the session start protocol and
then add this new type. the same task
from the beginning. So, it's set priming
its context. So, when it goes into this
task, it's not starting from scratch. It
also has all of this context from
claw.md.
If you've been using tools like this for
a while, this is nothing new. This is
just how we already operate. So, this
agent immediately has improved its
results over the first agent where we
can see it's looking at other parts of
the codebase. It's looking at this
metric store which is correct and it's
asking me a more detailed question. So I
as the developer here in level two, I'm
still very interactive with this
process. So let's move on to level three
here. And what level three looks like is
you have your agent start delegating
tasks, right? So your agent is now using
scouts, builders, and it's delegating
work to other agent. This means your
agent gets more intelligent because it's
having other agents gather information
and return findings back to the base
agent. And the base agents context is
preserved, meaning it can be more
efficient in its work. You can imagine
we have a pretty simple outline of
phases here. A scout, plan, build,
review phase. And essentially, all of
this happens in one session. So again,
you're still limited to a single session
and a single task. So let's take a look
at what this actually looks like in the
cloud code session. I've started cla
with dangerously skip permissions just
so I can be a little more hands-off and
let it delegate without having to check
with me at every tool use. So I'll give
it a very similar prompt. I'll also
append a section here to the prompt that
just says delegate scouting before you
implement. So now what this agent is
going to do is it's going to prime its
context with the mulch and all those
tools I talked about earlier. And then
it's going to delegate scouts. So it's
going to call sub agents to go and do
some work for it. So instead of it
having to go through and read a bunch of
files, it's going to have a explore
agent here. So this is a separate sub
agent scouting out the problem,
gathering information, gathering
highquality context that it will return
back to this base agent. So the agent
has reported back. It's asking me
questions now. The scout report came
back. It saved this base agent a ton of
tokens and a ton of tool usage. And now
the base agent is asking me for what I
want to do next. So you can imagine that
I decide what I want to do next. Then I
have it delegate that to a plan agent
for example, a build agent and a review
agent. This base agent that I'm actually
having a conversation with is acting as
a like pseudo orchestrator already. It's
delegating tasks to other agents. It's
paralyzing work. This is a glimpse into
a more powerful workflow. Level four is
where things start to get interesting
and this is where I feel most developers
are at right now. This is you as the
developer acting as the orchestrator
orchestrating a ton of intelligence, a
ton of agents. So you have multiple
agent sessions running in multiple
terminals at the same time, but you are
the one deciding which agent works
where. You know what it's working on,
when it has to work on that thing. And
you move much faster when you start to
paralyze like this. But it requires a
ton of focus and a ton of attention. And
it's very taxing when you start working
with multiple agents at a time and
you're like trying to coordinate five,
six agents at a time. So agents can also
easily run into conflicts because you're
not isolating code changes. Now there
are exceptions to this. You can run
multiple sessions and multiple work
trees. I'm not saying that isolation
doesn't exist here, but for the most
part, the developers I see that are
running at level 4 aren't really
utilizing work trees, isolation, stuff
like that. So, let's take a look at what
level four looks like in the code. Here
I am back in the codebase. This is the
same session on the right side of my
screen from step three. And essentially
what I'm going to do is just approve
whatever it wants me to approve. And
then over here, I'm going to give this
agent a new task. So you can see right
away I'm starting to paralyze my agents.
What I'm going to do here is for example
just add like a tool result type to the
logger in my system. So I've given this
second agent a second task. This first
agent over here is asking me for
whatever it's wanting to work on. Now I
have two agents working on two separate
tasks and two separate terminal windows.
So now I'm the one orchestrating what's
going on between these two. So this
agent finished up some work. I'm going
to clear that out because I don't
actually want that work to be done. And
I'll just close out this window. And
then over here, we can see the second
session is doing that same step three
pattern of using a scout to explore
things first. It's going to come back to
me with questions, so on and so forth.
Now, we're up to level five. And level
five is where things get really
interesting. This is where you, as the
developer, move further and further
outside of the loop of your agents. So
instead of you having to juggle three,
four, five more agent sessions at a time
and understanding what each agent
session is working on, you delegate that
cognitive overload to another agent.
Isolation becomes a requirement in steps
like this. It is no longer a suggestion.
When you are having a system orchestrate
itself, orchestrate a dozen plus agents
at a time, you can't have all of those
agents working on the same codebase. You
have to have them in isolated
environments so that when they all come
together with their completed tasks, you
can juggle that merging correctly. This
has the same parallelization of level
four, but the developer isn't watching
anymore. The developer isn't needed as
much in this specific task. So, you have
an orchestration agent that is
coordinating all of the different tasks
that you want to work on. let me be
clear, requires a very high amount of
trust in your system, which means that
you have to think about what your
codebase looks like and how you can
place more trust into agents. That's
going to look different for every
codebase, every project, every team. So,
there's no one-izefits-all for this.
There are systems that try to do that,
but at the end of the day, you as a
developer have to decide what placing
trust in your agents actually looks
like. And let's be very clear here. If
you don't set this up properly, it's
very easy for a system like this to go
ary and for you to lose all control over
your system. Let's take a look at what
this looks like in the code. So here I
am. I have a GitHub issue that I want to
work on. It's number 86 here. So what
I'm going to do is head back into the
codebase. This is the same codebase that
I've already been working in. This is a
different task that I'm passing off to
the agent. And this is going to look
different than a typical cloud code
session because right away I'm using a
custom orchestration system. The system
I'm using right now is Overstory. If
you're not familiar with Overstory, it's
a project I built. I'll link it down
below, but it's an agent orchestration
system. So, what I'm going to do is I'll
run this Overstory coordinator start
command. And what's going to happen is
we're going to get a cloud code session
that looks very similar to any other
cloud code session you're running.
However, this cloud code session acts as
the coordinator or the orchestrator in
my case. And what I'll do here is I'm
just going to pass this orchestration
system, the GitHub issue number 86. And
the coordinator is going to take it from
there. I no longer have to be in the
loop for this entire system to go end to
end on fixing this problem. So to
monitor this, what I can do is open up
Overstories dashboard. So we can see
there's already a lead getting to work
on this specific issue and this
delegation is still happening. The
building is still happening. All of the
steps I've talked about in previous
steps of the ladder, those still exist
here. It's just now there is a much
higher degree of coordination happening.
If you're interested in what this looks
like in actual code, I'll give you a
quick overview here. But really, at the
end of the day, you're going to have to
go and look at this project yourself
because it's so much happening that it's
hard to cover in a single video. But
essentially, Overstory operates with
isolated work trees. So, we can see this
lead agent here, which is like a sub
agent, is now working in an isolated
version of the codebase. And
additionally, we have a whole bunch of
hooks set up so that agents are very
clearly using the patterns that we want
them to be using. There are a ton of
guard rails set up. So, not only do we
have these custom overstory hooks, we
also have several cloud code hooks. So,
we can see there's a ton of different
hooks that will block commands that will
inform agents of how to use specific
commands. And this is all by design,
right? We want to make sure that this
orchestration agent is coordinating
everything effectively how we expect it
to be coordinated. Now, as these agents
are working, I'll try and highlight a
bit of what's happening behind the
scenes for these agents. So, we can see
they are sending mail to one another.
So, they're having inter agent
communication. Again, I have only sent
that initial prompt. And now we have a
builder agent who's actually
implementing the fix after this lead
agent scouted it out and planned the fix
that the builder needs to implement. We
have begun allowing the coordinator
agent here to fully go endto-end on this
issue. I no longer have to look at the
code in the files. I don't have to do
any of that as the developer because I
have enough trust in this system to
build itself. Now let me be clear. This
is overstory dog fooding overstory,
right? It's working on its own codebase.
This is a process that has taken quite a
long time to build up. So you can think
that every agent in this workflow has
access to mulch like all of that stored
expertise. There's specific issue
tracking. So every issue that the agents
are working on is tracked. We can see
the coordinator here is checking on the
status of the rest of the agents. So, as
it's going, it's monitoring to make sure
that every agent is aligned with what
I'm expecting it to be doing. And like I
said, this takes a tremendous amount of
trust. This is Overstory working on its
own codebase. So, I've set this system
up to be very good at working on itself.
The thing is, if you are building a
system like this in your codebase or
using a system like this in your
codebase, you as the developer have to
really understand deeply what's
happening behind the scenes here.
Without that deep understanding, you
cannot place trust in your agents. I
know that the agents that I have set up
here that the system that I have set up
here will 10 out of 10 times write
better code than I ever could. And it's
going to write it at a thousand times
faster than I ever could. This is where
top performing engineers are operating
at. This is what teams of engineers are
using to delegate, orchestrate, and
really accelerate the process of
development. when it comes to working on
a codebase. All right, welcome to level
six, which is the cutting edge, I think,
of where everything is going right now.
And this is where I am heading with my
open source maintenance, especially a
project like Overstory. We have 700
stars on it now. And there's a ton of
issues opening up every day. So, what
I'm doing is I'm more or less completely
moving, removing myself from the loop
here. Let's take a look at what this
actually looks like.
And let me be clear that this is mostly
theory at this point. I have a working
implementation that I will show you, but
it's definitely not a working
implementation that I would recommend
other people start using. So the
developer is no longer needed. That's
what level six is. We automate the
entire endto-end process of development
in your project. So agents are now
triaging, coordinating, and delegating
vast quantities of work, all without me
as a human ever having to step into the
system. So the human developer can still
review, but to be honest with you, I
think that is going to be automated very
quickly as well because reviewing at
this point is just redundant. It's it's
not really needed. If you have set up
the guardrails, you can ensure that
agents are writing high quality code. In
this level six, essentially what's
happening is agents are watching for new
issues, planning and implementing the
fixes, and then deploying that without
any human intervention. This is where my
open source maintenance is going. And
I'm going to show you a little sneak
peek what that looks like right now for
me. This is a project I have called
greenhouse. And greenhouse is the final
layer in this overstory ecosystem that I
have been building. And what we have
here is this is a brand new repository,
but we have a issue here and it's
labeled with this agent ready. So you
can see if I hover over this, it says
ready for automated agent pickup. Now
let's take a look at what this actually
does. Here I am in the greenhouse
project within VS Code. And what I have
set up here is I can essentially run
greenhouse start. And this is going to
boot a longived process on my machine.
And we can see it found that issue that
was open in GitHub. It has ingested that
issue and now it is forming a seeds ID
for that. And if I go over into
Overstory dashboard, what we can see is
that Overstory automatically booted up.
So I haven't done anything. I haven't
run any Overstory commands. All I've
done is run this greenhouse start
command and it found that open issue
that was tagged with agents ready. And
now we have a coordinator getting to
work on fixing that issue. So I have
trust in this system that it's going to
complete this issue end to end without
any problems. And what we're going to
have happen is at the end of this
workflow, we're going to have a PR be
opened up. This, like I said, is very
early stages, but what we have is a
system that I have automated the entire
development process for. So this will
still open up a GitHub PR for this, but
that's not even needed at this honestly.
I think if you just are triaging issues
as a human, sort of deciding what your
agent works on, you can basically set
this up to fully automate end to end the
entire development process of your
codebase. Meaning what I'm going to do
for my open source projects is
essentially automate them so that
anytime somebody opens an issue that I
think is important, I just tag it with
that agent ready label and then I can
just be sure that the server is going to
pick it up and it's going to implement
it and it'll get pushed to the next
version. No problem. I was totally hands
off for that whole process. I want to
chime in here and say that the PR did
get opened. So, we have a endto-end
system working from issue to PR without
me ever having to step into the loop.
And like I said, opening the PR at this
point is just a formality. It's not even
really needed. So, hopefully you found
this video to be helpful. I know I
didn't dig super deep into what every
single layer of this looks like in
actual code, but at the end of the day,
your code base is going to look
drastically different than mine. And so
you as an engineer, as a developer who
wants to stay ahead of the curve, you
have to decide what each of these levels
look like in your codebase specifically.
So if you would like help with any of
the concepts I just talked about here,
if you're curious to see the projects
I'm working on, I'll link my GitHub down
below. That's where you can find all of
the code that I was showing in this
video. Also, you can go join my free
school community. It's Prompt to prod.
This is a great community. We have a lot
of active conversations happening in
here and you can also if you're
interested in working with me check out
my consulting website which I'll link
down below. So thank you so much for
watching. This is a longer video but I
hope you found this valuable and I hope
that this is something that you and your
team can go apply to your code bases. I
will see you guys in the next one.